Dataset title:  Nekton species counts and density from flume net collections along Rowley River tidal creeks associated with long term fertilization experiments, Rowley, MA.

Dataset ID:  LTE-TIDE-NektonFlumeDensity.04
Dataset Creator

	Name:		Linda Deegan
	Organization:	Plum Island Ecosystems LTER Program
	
	Address:
			The Ecosystems Center
			Marine Biological Laboratory
			7 MBL St.
			Woods Hole, MA 02543  USA
	


Metadata Provider

	Organization:	Plum Island Ecosystems LTER Program
	
	Address:
			The Ecosystems Center
			Marine Biological Lab
			7 MBL St
			Woods Hole, MA 02543  USA
	
	Phone:		(508) 289 7485
	Email:		pie_im@mbl.edu
	URL:		http://pie-lter.ecosystems.mbl.edu


Dataset Abstract

	The flume nets were deployed with the purpose of capturing salt marsh nekton. Nekton species were identified to the lowest taxonomic level using species keys. The TIDE project aims to simulate eutrophication on a large scale by the addition of NO3- aiming to reach 70µM concentrations from May to September every year during the growing season. This fertilization of the marsh has been going on at Sweeney Creek since the 2004 growing season through 2011 and at Clubhead Creek in 2005 and from 2009 till 2015.


Dataset Keywords

	PIE LTER
	TIDE
	population dynamics
	salt marsh
	flume nets
	fish
	nekton
	shrimp


Intellectual Rights

	Acceptance and utilization of PIE-LTER data requires that:
	
        
          
            The Principal Investigator be sent a notice stating reasons for acquiring any data and a description of the publication intentions.
          
          
            The Principal Investigator of the data set be sent a copy of the report or manuscript prior to submission and be adequately cited in any resultant publications
          
          
            A copy of any resultant publications should be sent to: 
            
Principal Investigator
Ecosystems Center
Marine Biological Laboratory
Woods Hole, MA 02543

            
          
        
      


Distribution

	Online distribution:  http://ecosystems.mbl.edu/PIE/data/LTE/LTE-TIDE-NektonFlumeDensity.html


Geographic Coverage


	Bounding Coordinates

		Geographic description:	"Sweeney Creek", off Rowley River, Ipswich, MA
		West bounding coordinate:	-70.851
		East bounding coordinate:	-70.845
		North bounding coordinate:	42.724
		South bounding coordinate:	42.719
	
		Geographic description:	West Creek, off Rowley River, Rowley, MA.
		West bounding coordinate:	-70.852
		East bounding coordinate:	-70.846
		North bounding coordinate:	42.741
		South bounding coordinate:	42.736
	
		Geographic description:	Clubhead Creek off Rowley River, Rowley, MA.
		West bounding coordinate:	-70.842
		East bounding coordinate:	-70.836
		North bounding coordinate:	42.742
		South bounding coordinate:	42.738
	
		Geographic description:	Nelson Island Creek, off Rowley River, Rowley,
		West bounding coordinate:	-70.836
		East bounding coordinate:	-70.831
		North bounding coordinate:	42.744
		South bounding coordinate:	42.74
	



Temporal Coverage

	Start Date:  2003-09-01
	End Date:  2015-09-25

Maintenance

	Version 01: January 25, 2012, updated data and metadata. Used MarcrosExportEML_HTML (working)pie_excel2007.xlsm 1/18/12 4:51 PM for QA/QC to EML 2.1.0


Dataset Contact

	Position:	Information Manager
	Organization:	LTER Network Office
	
	Address:
			UNM Biology Department, MSC03-2020
			1 University of New Mexico
			Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001  USA
	
	Phone:		505 277-2535
	Fax:		505 277-2541
	Email:		tech-support@lternet.edu
	URL:		http://www.lternet.edu


Methods



	Method Step 

		Description 

			
            
Locations: Sweeney (SW), West (WE), Clubhead (CL), and Nelson (NE)
 
Flume Nets
 
    Each year flume nets (3-4) were installed at roughly equal distances along each creek. The flume nets, installed perpendicularly to the creek channel, consisted of two sides and removable front and back panels. The 6mm mesh net side panels were dug into the marsh so that the marsh surface formed the bottom of the “flume” and attached to PVC stakes at either end. The front (cod end) of the flume was a 3m W x 1.5m H x 3m L conical shaped nylon mesh net that was anchored in the main creek channel to provide a low water refuge for nekton. The back panel was a 3m x 1.5m rectangular net attached to PVC stakes. The size and placement of the nets varied slightly in some years; 2003-2006 flume nets dimensions were 3m W x 10m L x 1.5m H the nets were placed at the creek edge in the low marsh tall Spartina alterniflora (TSA) and extended into the high marsh Spartina patens (SP); 2009-2010 flume nets were 2m W x 5 m L x 1.5 m H and placed in the high marsh (SP) habitat; 2011 flume nets were 3m W x 10m L x 1.5m H and placed in the TSA at the creek edge. 
 
Sampling Collection and Processing
 
     All flume net collections occurred at night within 48 hrs of the monthly spring tide from June to September. Prior to sampling events the nets were lowered to ensure nekton could freely move in and out of the sampling area. At slack high tide teams quietly approached the nets and deployed them capturing any nekton inside the area of during high tide. As the tide fell nekton were funneled into the code end where they were recovered at low tide. In the lab the nekton were identified to the lowest taxonomic level, measured to the nearest millimeter, and weighed to the nearest 0.01 grams. For fishes total length (TL) was measured from the tip of the snout to the end of the caudal fin. Shrimp TL was measured from the tip of the rostrum to the end of the tail. For crab species the carapace width was measured from its widest point. 
 
Fish Exclusion
 
     From 2004-2006, as part of a series of experiments to understand the role of fish in food web controls, a barrier designed to prevent the movement of fish was installed in the right branch of  SW and WE. The barrier was constructed of wood, PVC, and NITEX and entrenched into the creek bottom and side walls. Fish on the upstream side of the barricade were removed to create and artificially low density. Each year at the end of the season the fish blocks were removed and reinstalled in the spring of the next year. 

          


Data Table

	Entity Name:  LTE-TIDE-NektonFlumeDensity.csv
	Entity Description:  Nekton species counts and density from flume net collections along Rowley River tidal creeks associated with long term fertilization experiments, Rowley, MA.
	Object Name:  LTE-TIDE-NektonFlumeDensity.csv



Data Format

	Number of Header Lines:  1
	Attribute Orientation:  column
	Field Delimiter:  ,
	Number of Records:  1906



Attributes

	Attribute Name:  Date
	Attribute Label:  Date
	Attribute Definition:  Sampling Date
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Creek
	Attribute Label:  Creek
	Attribute Definition:  Creek Sampled
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		SW= Sweeney- Nutrient Enriched
		NE= Nelson- Reference
		WE= West- Reference
		CL= Clubhead- Nutrient enriched
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Branch
	Attribute Label:  Branch
	Attribute Definition:  Branch Sampled
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		L= Left Branch
		R= Right Branch
		C= Confluence
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Replicate
	Attribute Label:  Replicate
	Attribute Definition:  Number of the replicate net
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		Number of the replicate net
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Fish Treatment
	Attribute Label:  Fish Treatment
	Attribute Definition:  Areas with low fish density were ones up stream of the block nets where fish had been removed. Ambient fish density areas were down stream of the block nes and had normal fish densities.
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		AMB= ambient fish density
		LOW= low fish density
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Species
	Attribute Label:  Species
	Attribute Definition:  Species identified to the lowest taxonomic level
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		ANR= Anguilla rostrata American eel
		PUP= Pungitius pungitius Ninespine stickleback
		FUH= Fundulus heteroclitus Common mummuchog
		GRC= Carcinus maenas Green crab
		MEM= Menidia menidia Atlantic silverside
		PAP= Palaemonetes pugio Grass shrimp
		SYF= Syngnathus fuscus Commom pipefish
		APQ= Apeltes quadracus Four-spined stickleback
		CRS= Crangon septemspinosa Sand shrimp
		CLU= Clupeid Herring menhaden etc
		XAN= Xanthidae Walking crab spp
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Number Caught
	Attribute Label:  Number Caught
	Attribute Definition:  the total number of individuals captured of a species for that sampling effort
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		Units:  number
		Number Type:  real
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


	Attribute Name:  Nekton density
	Attribute Label:  Nekton density
	Attribute Definition:  the total number captured divided by the area of the net used, in numbers/m2
	Storage Type:  
	Measurement Scale: 
		Units:  numberPerMeterSquared
		Number Type:  real
	Missing Value Code: NA  (NA = not available)


